content/posts/2020-05-27-how-to-grow-new-roots-on-damaged-seedlings.md, before:

---
template: SinglePost
title: How to Grow New Roots on Damaged Seedlings   
slug: how-to-grow-new-roots-on-damaged-seedlings
status: Published
date: '2020-05-27'
featuredImage: https://www.experientialgardener.com/images/rerooting-damaged-plants-blog.jpg
excerpt: >-
  Armenian cucumbers (Cucumis melo Var. flexuosus), are easy to grow and very
  prolific producers. They grow very well in Texas and are more heat tolerant
  than regular cucumbers. 
categories:
  - category: Vegetables
meta:
  title: Growing Armenian Cucumbers in Texas
  description: >-
    A young pepper seedling was found lying at a 45-degree angle in the soil. Upon closer examination, the plant stem had been eaten apart from the roots by a cutworm. Cutworms are usually still hiding in the top ½” of soil. Remove the cutworm if you find one. 2nd photo:  The pepper has grown a new set of roots and can be transplanted back into the garden.)
---

<br>

![Young pepper seedling with damaged root that was repaired](/images/rerooting-damaged-plants-blog.jpg "A young pepper seedling was found lying at a 45-degree angle in the soil. Upon closer examination, the plant stem had been eaten apart from the roots by a cutworm. Cutworms are usually still hiding in the top ½” of soil. Remove the cutworm if you find one. 2nd photo:  The pepper has grown a new set of roots and can be transplanted back into the garden")

<br>

If you find a damaged seedling that has been separated from its roots by a cutworm, slug, hail, animals or other damage, chances are high that you can save it and grow a new set of roots! 

<br>

### Re-rooting or Growing a New Set of Roots: 

As soon as you find the damaged plant give it a second chance at life by trying this simple gardening tip. Just place the plant in a clear glass of tap water and set it in a location that receives bright, indirect light. It does not matter how wilted the plant may be. Put it in water as soon as possible. It will probably perk up in a few hours. 

Change out the water if it becomes cloudy or darkens. Fresh water and bright light are the keys to growing a new set of roots. Most plants will grow a new set of roots in 1 to 2 weeks.  

<br>


![The young pepper that grew new roots has now been transplanted back into the garden and is happily thriving. Specks on the underside of leaves are rain splattered dirt particles)](/images/happy-rerooted-pepper-plant.jpg "The young pepper that grew new roots has now been transplanted back into the garden and is happily thriving. Specks on the underside of leaves are rain splattered dirt particles")

<br>

### Replant the Plant in the Garden: 

Once the plant has regrown a new root system, it can be replanted in the garden or a pot. It is best to transplant the newly rooted plant in the evening when temperatures are cooler. After transplanting, water the plant with the water it was rooting in and give it a little additional water (water well).

<br>

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/6YaZfoSZpBk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Commit message:

Corrected title tage - How To grow new roots on damaged seeedlings

content/posts/2020-05-27-how-to-grow-new-roots-on-damaged-seedlings.md, after:

---
template: SinglePost
title: How to Grow New Roots on Damaged Seedlings   
slug: how-to-grow-new-roots-on-damaged-seedlings
status: Published
date: '2020-05-27'
featuredImage: https://www.experientialgardener.com/images/rerooting-damaged-plants-blog.jpg
excerpt: >-
  Armenian cucumbers (Cucumis melo Var. flexuosus), are easy to grow and very
  prolific producers. They grow very well in Texas and are more heat tolerant
  than regular cucumbers. 
categories:
  - category: Vegetables
meta:
  title: How to Grow New Roots on Damaged Seedlings
  description: >-
    A young pepper seedling was found lying at a 45-degree angle in the soil. Upon closer examination, the plant stem had been eaten apart from the roots by a cutworm. Cutworms are usually still hiding in the top ½” of soil. Remove the cutworm if you find one. 2nd photo:  The pepper has grown a new set of roots and can be transplanted back into the garden.)
---

<br>

![Young pepper seedling with damaged root that was repaired](/images/rerooting-damaged-plants-blog.jpg "A young pepper seedling was found lying at a 45-degree angle in the soil. Upon closer examination, the plant stem had been eaten apart from the roots by a cutworm. Cutworms are usually still hiding in the top ½” of soil. Remove the cutworm if you find one. 2nd photo:  The pepper has grown a new set of roots and can be transplanted back into the garden")

<br>

If you find a damaged seedling that has been separated from its roots by a cutworm, slug, hail, animals or other damage, chances are high that you can save it and grow a new set of roots! 

<br>

### Re-rooting or Growing a New Set of Roots: 

As soon as you find the damaged plant give it a second chance at life by trying this simple gardening tip. Just place the plant in a clear glass of tap water and set it in a location that receives bright, indirect light. It does not matter how wilted the plant may be. Put it in water as soon as possible. It will probably perk up in a few hours. 

Change out the water if it becomes cloudy or darkens. Fresh water and bright light are the keys to growing a new set of roots. Most plants will grow a new set of roots in 1 to 2 weeks.  

<br>


![The young pepper that grew new roots has now been transplanted back into the garden and is happily thriving. Specks on the underside of leaves are rain splattered dirt particles)](/images/happy-rerooted-pepper-plant.jpg "The young pepper that grew new roots has now been transplanted back into the garden and is happily thriving. Specks on the underside of leaves are rain splattered dirt particles")

<br>

### Replant the Plant in the Garden: 

Once the plant has regrown a new root system, it can be replanted in the garden or a pot. It is best to transplant the newly rooted plant in the evening when temperatures are cooler. After transplanting, water the plant with the water it was rooting in and give it a little additional water (water well).

<br>

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/6YaZfoSZpBk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
